## Some Excercises

### 1.12
(Excercise) If $k\subset F$ is a field extension, there is an additive functor 

$$ Cor_k\rightarrow Cor_F $$

sending $X$ to $X_F$, and the cycle $W\in Z(X\times_k Y)$ to $[W\times_kF]\in Z(X_F\times_F Y_F)$. 

If $F$ is finite and separable over $k$, there is an additive functor $Cor_F\rightarrow Cor_k$ sendinf $U/F$ to $U/k$ (separatedness for smoothness). These are adjoint: if $U$ is smooth over $F$ and $X$ is smooth over $k$, there is a canonical identification

$$ Cor_F(U,X_F)=Cor_k(U,X). $$

This is kinda obvious since $U\times_F(X\times_kF)\simeq U\times_k X$.

### 1.11

1. Let $x$ be a closed point of $X$, considered as a correspondence from $k$ to $X$. Then the composition $k\rightarrow X\rightarrow k$ is multiplcation by $[\kappa(X):k]$ and $X\rightarrow k\rightarrow X$ is $X\times x\subset X\times X$.

This is easy.

2. Let $L/k$ b a finite Galois extension with Galois group $G$. Prove that $Cor_k(L,L)\simeq\mathbb{Z}[G]$  (just count the points) and $L\rightarrow k\rightarrow L$ is $\sum_{g\in G}g\in\mathbb{Z}[G]$. Then show  that $Cor_k(k,Y)\simeq Cor_k(L,Y)^G$ for every $Y$.

For the last statement use [1.12] above we see that $Cor_k(L,Y)\simeq Cor_L(L,Y_L)$, so the question reforms to $Z_0(Y)=Z_0(Y_L)^G$. Note that this also causes

$$ Cors_k(k,Y)\rightarrow Cors_k(L,Y)\rightrightarrows Cors_k(L\otimes_kL,Y) $$

being an equilizer diagram.

### 1.13
(Excercise)

1. Let $F$ be a field extension of $k$ and $X$ and $Y$ two smooth schemes over $k$. Write $X_F$ for $X\times_kF$ and so on, show that $Cor_F(X_F,Y_F)$ is the limit of $Cor_E(X_E,Y_E)$ as $E$ ranges over all finitely generated field extensions of $k$ in $F$.

If $F/k$ is finite this is obvious. Say if a scheme $X/k$ is of finite type (this is the assumption we take at the starting), an ideal sheaf $\mathcal{I}$ on $X_F$ is locally determined by a quotient

$$ \mathcal{O}_U^{\oplus n}\xrightarrow{some\ sections}\mathcal{O}_U\rightarrow\mathcal{I}\rightarrow 0 $$

with $n$ finite (Noetherian). Due to the assumption that $X$ is quasi-compact, there are in total finitely many local sections determining $\mathcal{I}$, so take $E/k$ to assure that those sections are all in $X_E$. Furthermore, every primary cycle lies in an affine (hence quasi-compact) local so we can push this to locally-of-fintie-type case. Now take $X$ to be $X\times_kY$.

2. Let $X/k$ be smooth morphism with $X$ connected. Denote by $F$ the function field of $X$. Show that $Cor_F(F,Y\times_kF)=colim_{U\subset X} Cor_k(U,Y)$ where $Y/k$ is smooth.

We need two points here, firstly every coprrespondence between $F$ and $Y_F$ should *go back to some open $U\times Y$*, secondly if two correspondences from $U$ to $Y$ coincides on the fibre $F$, then *they shold coincide on some $V\subset U$*. 


## Etale sheaf with transfers

### 6.2
(Lemma) For any scheme $T/k$, $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(T)$ is an etale sheaf.

proof. Let $X$ be connected and smooth over $k$ with connected etale cover $U\rightarrow X$. As $U\times T\rightarrow X\times T$ is flat and surjective, the pullback of cycles is well-defined and is an injection. The statement of being a sheaf requires the exactness of

$$ 0\rightarrow Cor_k(X,T)\rightarrow Cor_k(U,T)\rightarrow Cor_k(U\times_XU,T). $$

Now we need only to verify the exactness at $Cor_k(U,T)$. Take $Z_U$ in $Cor_k(U,T)$ whose image in $Cor_k(U\times_XU,T)$ vanish. Denote by $F$ and $L$ the function fields of $X$ and $U$ respectively. Using [1.11] we know that 

$$ Cor_F(F,T_F)\rightarrow Cor_F(L,T_F)\rightrightarrows Cor_F(L\otimes_FL,T_F) $$

is an equilizer diagram. Now $Z_L$, the fibre of $Z_U$ at $L$, vanishes in $Cor_F(L\otimes_FL,T_F)$ and hence there is a Zariski open $V\subset X$ and a cycle $Z_V$ in $Cor_k(V,T)$ agreeing with $Z_U$ in $Cor_k(U\times_XV,T)$ by [1.13]. **We can further assume that $Z_V$ is primary (irreducible)**. 

Let $Z$ be the closure of $Z_V$ in $X\times T$. It is irredcible and dominant over $X$ since $Z\times_XV$ is, and the lifting of which to $U\times T$ is $Z_U$. Then **$Z_U$ being finite over $U$ implies that $Z$ is finite over $X$**, then $Z$ is a finite correspondence in $Cor_k(X,T)$.

### 6.12
(Psoposition) Let $p:U\rightarrow X$ be an etale covering of a scheme $X$. Then $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(\check{U})$ is an etale resolution of the sheaf $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$, i.e., the following complex is exact as a complex of etale sheaves

$$ \cdots\xrightarrow{\partial}\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(U\times_XU)\xrightarrow{\partial}\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(U)\xrightarrow{p}\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)\rightarrow 0. $$

proof. Problematic!!



## Homotopy (pre)sheaves

### 2.15
(Definition) A presheaf $F$ is homotopy invariant if for every $X$ the map $p^*:F(X)\rightarrow F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)$ is an isomorphism. As $p:X\times\mathbb{A}^1\rightarrow X$ has a section $p^*$ is always *split injective*. Thus homotopy invariance of $F$ is equivalent to $p^*$ being onto. 

Let $i_\alpha:X\hookrightarrow X\times\mathbb{A}^1$ be the inclusion $x\mapsto(x,\alpha)$, and $i_\alpha^*$ the corresponding lifted morphism.

### 2.16
(Lemma) $F$ is homotopy invariant iff

$$ i_0^*=i_1^*:F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\rightarrow F(X) $$

for all $X$. (This is the intuition of being homotopy invariant.)

proof. One direction is clear, so we prove the sufficency. Given $i_0^*=i_1^*$ for all $X$, let $m:\mathbb{A}^1\times\mathbb{A}^1$ be the multiplcation map sending $(x,y)$ to $xy$. Then we have the diagram

```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	& {F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)} & {F(X)} \\
	\\
	{F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)} & {F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1\times\mathbb{A}^1)} & {F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1).}
	\arrow["{i_0^*}", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{id^*}"', from=1-2, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{(id_X\times m)^*}", from=1-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow["{p^*}", from=1-3, to=3-3]
	\arrow["{(i_1\times id)^*}", from=3-2, to=3-1]
	\arrow["{(i_0\times id)^*}"', from=3-2, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}
```

For a sheaf $F$ we denote by $C_*F$ the sheaf sending an object $X$ to the chain complex 

$$ \cdots\rightarrow F(X\times\Delta^2)\rightarrow F(X\times\Delta^1)\rightarrow F(X\times\Delta^0=X)\rightarrow 0. $$

### 2.18
(Lemma) Let $F$ be a presheaf, then the maps $i_0^*,i_1^*:C_*F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\rightarrow C_*F(X)$ are chain homotopic. 

proof. Really dull work, the same case as in topology. Want to verify?

### 2.19
(Corollary) If $F$ is a presheaf then the homology presheaves 

$$ H_nC_*F:X\mapsto H_nC_*F(X) $$

are homotopy invariant for all $n$.

### 2.22
(Lemma) Let $F$ be a presheaf of abelian groups. Suppose that for every smooth scheme $X$ there is a *natural* homomorphism $h_X:F(X)\rightarrow F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)$ which fits into

```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	& {F(X)} \\
	{F(X)} & {F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)} & {F(X)}
	\arrow["0"', from=1-2, to=2-1]
	\arrow["{h_X}"{description}, from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["id", from=1-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow["{i_0^*}", from=2-2, to=2-1]
	\arrow["{i_1^*}"', from=2-2, to=2-3]
\end{tikzcd}
```

then the complex $C_*F$ is chain contractible.

Proof. By naturality, $h_X$ induces a map $C_*h:C_*F(X)\rightarrow C_*F(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)$. Applying $C_*$ to the diagram above we see that the identity map is then chain homotopic to $0$.

The prototype for this is the sheaf of global functions $\mathcal{O}$. Note that $\mathcal{O}(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)=\mathcal{O}(X)[t]$, then set $h_X(f)=tf$.

### 2.24
(Very important corollary) For any $X$ there is a canonical projection $p:X\times\mathbb{A}^1\rightarrow X$, which induces a map $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\rightarrow\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$. Then $C_*\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\rightarrow C_*\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$ is a chain homotopy equivalance.

proof. We shall break $C_*\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)$ into $C_*\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)\oplus C_*F$ where $C_*F$ is chain contractible. Denote by $F$ the cokernel of (or fit into)

$$ 0\rightarrow\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)\xrightarrow{\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(i_0)}\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\rightarrow F\rightarrow 0. $$

Note that this is a short exact seq. for *presheaves*. Then denote by $H_U$ the composition

$$ Cor(U,X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\xrightarrow{lifting} Cor(U\times\mathbb{A}^1,(X\times\mathbb{A}^1)\times\mathbb{A}^1) \\ \xrightarrow{multiplcation} Cor(U\times\mathbb{A}^1,X\times\mathbb{A}^1) $$

where the *multiplcation* is $\mathbb{A}^2\rightarrow\mathbb{A}^1$. Simple observation shows that $H_U$ sends $Cor(U,X\times\{0\})$ to $Cor(U\times\mathbb{A}^1,X\times\{0\})$, hence it induces a natural map $h_U:F(U)\rightarrow F(U\times\mathbb{A}^1)$. For $U=X\times\mathbb{A}^1$ it's easy to see that the composition of $H_U$ with $i_0,i_1:U\rightarrow U\times\mathbb{A}^1$ sends $id\in Cor(U=X\times\mathbb{A}^1,X\times\mathbb{A}^1)$ to the projection $i_0p:X\times\mathbb{A}^1\rightarrow X\rightarrow X\times\mathbb{A}^1$ and $id$ respectively. Therefore $F(i_0)h_U(id)=0$ and $F(i_1)h_U(id)=id$ for $U=X\times\mathbb{A}^1$.

For any other $U$, every element $\bar{f}\in F(U)$ is the image of $id$

<span style="color:red">
Ouch.
</span>

