---
title: Injectiveness of Pullback Map of Cycles for Étale Cover
author: Peilin Lee
mathjax: on
---

# [Statement] For an étale cover $f:Y\rightarrow X$, the pullback map between cycles $f^*:Z(X)\rightarrow Z(Y)$ is injective.

#### [Lemma [02RD](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02RD)] $f\mapsto f^*$ is functorial for flat morphisms.

#### [Lemma [02RH](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02RH)] Let $(S,δ)$ be as in Situation [02QL](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02QL). $X$, $Y$ be locally of finite type over $S$. Let $f:X\rightarrow Y$ be a finite locally free morphism of degree $d$. Then $f$ is both proper and flat of relative dimension $0$, and $$f_∗f^∗\alpha=d\alpha$$ for every $\alpha\in Z_k(Y)$.

This implies that for a finite locally free and flat morphism $Y\rightarrow X$, the pull back map must be injective.

#### [Lemma [02LH](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02LH)] Let $f:U\rightarrow S$ be a surjective étale morphism of affine schemes. There exists a surjective, finite locally free morphism $\pi:T\rightarrow S$ and a finite open covering $T=T_1\cup\cdots\cup T_n$ such that each $T_i\rightarrow S$ factors through $U\rightarrow S$. 

The diagram goes like
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	& {T'=\coprod T_i} \\
	T && U \\
	& S
	\arrow["\pi", from=2-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow["\iota", from=1-2, to=2-1]
	\arrow["f"', from=2-3, to=3-2]
	\arrow["g"', dashed, from=1-2, to=2-3]
\end{tikzcd}
```

#### [Lemma [Illusie, 2.2.3](/assets/IllusieTopicsInAlgebraicGeometry.pdf)] For morphisms $g:X\rightarrow Y$ and $f:Y\rightarrow S$, if $f\circ g$ is smooth, and the short exact sequence below splits locally, then $g$ is smooth.

```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	0 & {g^*\Omega_{Y/S}} & {\Omega_{X/S}} & {\Omega_{X/Y}} & 0
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-4]
	\arrow[from=1-4, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}\
``` 
Especially, this holds when $f$ is étale. So the induced morphism $g$ in [Lemma [02LH](https://stacks.math.columbia.edu/tag/02LH)] is smooth, hence flat.

#### [Lemma 0] For a Zariski cover $u:U\rightarrow X$, the pullback map $u^*:Z(X)\rightarrow Z(U)$ is injective. 

This is something obvious. 

Now put all these together, we see that $g^*\circ f^*=(f\circ g)^*=\iota^*\pi^*$ is injective, hence $f^*$ must be injective. This finally do pin down the proof, only if we have our sheaf of cycles decent along an (affine) Zariski covering. We will have a further discussion later.