---
title: Notes on Rational Curves on Varieties, I
author: Peilin Lee
mathjax: on
---

# Basics in geometry of curves

Given a smooth curve $C$ over a field $k$, the canonical bundle $K$ is just the bundle of $1$-forms, namely $\Omega_{C/k}^1$. Moreover if $C/k$ is proper, then for any divisor $D$ we have Riemann-Roch
$$ l(D)-l(K-D)=deg(D)-g+1 $$
where $l(\bullet)$ stands for $\dim\Gamma(C,\mathcal{O}(\bullet))$, and $g$ is the genus. In the case of varieties over $\mathbb{C}$, the (arithmetic) genus is just $h^1(C,\mathcal{O}_C)$. In fact, according to Serre duality, $l(K-D)=h^0(\Omega_{C/k}^1\otimes\mathcal{O}(D)^\vee)=h^1(\mathcal{O}(D))$. Therefore the left side is just $\chi(\mathcal{O}(D))$. The generalized form, Grothendieck-Riemann-Roch formula, states that for a vector bundle $E/C$ of rank $n$ and degree $d$ (the degree of the first Chern class $c_1(E)\in CH_0(C)$) we have
$$ \chi(C,E)=ch(Rf_*E)=f_*(ch(E)\cdot td(T_{C/k}))=d+n(1-g) $$
where $f:C\rightarrow k$ is the structural morphism.

# Normalization of a curve
It should hold for a curve that the difference $p_a(C)-p_g(C)$ is equal to the number of points of singular locus of $C$, which shall vanish after a normalization namely 
$$ \tilde{C}\xrightarrow{f} C $$
and the geometric genus $p_g(\bullet)$ is birationally invariant.

We can say even more about the normalization map. In fact, $f$ is uniquely determined by the properties of being finite, birational and $\tilde{C}$ being normal. If $C$ is the union of irreducible components $C_1\cdots C_n$, then $\tilde{C}$ is the disjoint union of $\tilde{C}_i$s (this can be deduced easily from the determining properties above). 

# Calculatin genus: Hirzebruch's formula


# Hilbert scheme and quot scheme
This section is a quick exposure to the theory of Hilbert scheme and Quot scheme. Utilizing hilbert scheme, the ultimate goal is to construct and study the mapping space from a projective scheme to a quasi-projective scheme. 

## Quot functor $\mathfrak{Q}uot_{E/X/S}$ and Hilbert functor $\mathfrak{H}ilb_{X/S}$

Given a scheme $X/S$ of finite type and a coherent (to expect a good definition of coherence we may assume $S$ is at least locally Noetherian) sheaf $E$ on $X$, there is a quot functor defined as below. For a morphism $T\rightarrow S$ of finite type, a **quotient of $E$ parametrized by $T$** is a pair $(\mathcal{F},q)$ satisfying

- $\mathcal{F}$ is a (quasi-)coherent sheaf on $X_T$ with schematic support proper over $T$, and itself flat over $T$;
- $q:E_T\rightarrow\mathcal{F}$ is surjective where $E_T$ is the pullback of $E$ along $T/S$.

Two such pairs $(\mathcal{F},q)$ and $(\mathcal{F}',q')$ are considered isomprphic if they share the same kernel in $E_T$. Since flatness and properness are stable under pullback, such a class parametrized by $T/S$ can be pullback to $T'/S$ along $T'\rightarrow T$. Hence we get a functor $\mathfrak{Q}uot_{E/X/S}$ sending $T/S$ to the class of quotents of $E$ parametrized by $T$, identifying the isomorphic objects. This is called the quotient functor. The hilbert functor $\mathfrak{H}ilb_{X/S}$ is defined to be $\mathfrak{Q}uot_{\mathcal{O}_X/X/S}$.

## Ampleness and positivity

## Hilbert polynomial and the stratification
Given a projective scheme over the field, namely $X/k$, and a line bundle $\mathcal{L}\in Pic(X)$, we may associate to every coherent sheaf $\mathcal{F}\in Coh(X)$ a function, which goes as
$$
	\Phi^\mathcal{L}(m)=\sum_{i=0}^\infty (-1)^i\dim_kH^i(X,\mathcal{F}\otimes\mathcal{L}^{\otimes m}).
$$
Here we do not assume any property of $\mathcal{L}$, however we may see later that it's of most convenience to choose an ample bundle. Since $X$ is projective, the right derivation of the projection $f:X\rightarrow k$ has a finite cohomological dimension, hence the sum make sense, and it's a classical result that $\Phi^\mathcal{L}$ is a numerical polynomial, which is then named as the Hilbert polynomial (with respect to $\mathcal{L}$). The first property of this construction is quite straightforward: the polynomial should be invariant under an extension of the base field. 
```rawlatex
% https://q.uiver.app/#q=WzAsNCxbMCwwLCJYJyJdLFsxLDAsImsnIl0sWzEsMSwiayJdLFswLDEsIlgiXSxbMywyLCJmIl0sWzEsMiwicyIsMl0sWzAsMSwiZiciXSxbMCwzLCJzJyIsMl1d
\[\begin{tikzcd}
	{X'} & {k'} \\
	X & k
	\arrow["{f'}", from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{s'}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["s"', from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow["f", from=2-1, to=2-2]
\end{tikzcd}\]
```
Let $\mathcal{M}=\mathcal{F}\otimes\mathcal{L}^{\otimes m}\in Coh(X)$ and $\mathcal{M}'=\mathcal{M}\otimes_k k'$, we know that $[Rs_*Rf'_*\mathcal{M}']=[Rf_*Rs'_*\mathcal{M}']=[Rf_*Rs'_*L(s')^*\mathcal{M}]=[k':k][Rf_*\mathcal{M}]$, and furthermore $[k':k]dim_{k'}[Rf_*'\mathcal{M}']=dim_{k}[Rs_*Rf'_*\mathcal{M}']$, which gives the expected result.

Assuming $\mathcal{L}$ being very ample, the second property, which is more involving, goes that for a projective scheme $X$ over a locally Noetherian base $S$ and a coherent sheaf $\mathcal{F}\in Coh(X)$ which is flat over $S$, the Hilbert polynomials over fibres of $S$, viewed as a map sending the spectra of $S$ to polynomials, should be locally constant on $S$. To prove this, we may further assume that $S$ is local, and $X$ is a projective space. 

### Lemma: Serre's vanishing theorem
Let $S=Spec(A)$, with $A$ noetherian, let $X$ be
a projective scheme over $S$ and let $\mathcal{L}$ be an ample line bundle on $X$. Then
for all $\mathcal{F}\in Coh(X)$, there exists an integer $n_0$ , such that $H^q(X,\mathcal{F}(n))=0$
for all $q>0$ and $n\geq n_0$ , where $\mathcal{F}(n)=\mathcal{F}\otimes\mathcal{L}^{\otimes n}$.





## $Hilb_1=?$



# Mapping space, ready for doing deformation

## Deformation 

# Specialization of cycles

# Chow variety, the Hilbert-Chow morphism
Different from Hilbert scheme, Chow variety is the moduli space of cycles instead of quotients. Namely, the variety $Gr(l,d,n)$ over a field $k$ parametrizes all the effective cycles of dimension $l$ and degree $d$ in the space $\mathbb{P}^{n-1}$. 

To illustrate the case, note that $\mathbb{A}^2/(x,y^2)$ and $\mathbb{A}^2/(x+y,x^2+y^2)$ are two pairs of duplicated points having distinct tangent spaces. However, they determine the same cycle in $\mathbb{A}^2$, which suggests that there should be a "forgetful" or "cycle" morphism from Hilbert scheme to the corresponding Chow variety. This is named as the Hilbert-Chow morphism.

## Examples of Chow varieties
The simplest example is the case where $d=1$, the variety $Gr(l,1,n)$ is just the Grassmannian $Gr(l,n)$, which parametrizes hypersurfaces of dimension $l$ embedded in $\mathbb{P}^{n-1}$.

## The Chow embedding



