---
title: From Milnor K-groups to Cycles, II
author: Peilin Lee
mathjax: on
---

# The norm
To be precise, the norm structure we hope to have for Milnor K-groups is a morphism $N_{k'/k}:K_n^M(k')\rightarrow K_n^M(k)$ for any finite extension $k'/k$. When over $\mathbb{P}_k^1$, this must behave like a *reciprocity* law, that is, satisfies $$ \sum_\nu N_{\kappa(\nu)/k}(\partial_\nu(\alpha))=0 $$ for every $\alpha\in K_{n+1}^M(k(t))$. Apart from this, it has to satisfies some more properties, that is, 

- functorial: $N_{k'/k}N_{k''/k'}=N_{k''/k}$,
- projection formula: $N_{k'/k}(x\cdot i_{k'/k}(y))=N_{k'/k}(x)\cdot y$ for every finite (simple) extension $k'/k$. (Well we'd better stick to separable extensions at this time)

This norm construction appears firstly in [BT73], which is proved by the steps

- Construct the norm: For any finite extension $k'/k$, embed $k'$ in $k(t)$ at valuation $\mu$. Then we see the diagram
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	{K_{n+1}^M(k)} & {K_{n+1}^M(k(t))} & {\oplus_{\nu\not=\infty} K_n^M(\kappa(\nu))} \\
	&& {K_n^M(\kappa(\infty))}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{\oplus\partial_\nu}", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{\partial_{deg}}"', from=1-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow["{\oplus N_\nu}", dashed, from=1-3, to=2-3]
\end{tikzcd}
```
induces all the *norm*s, so take $\nu$ to be $\mu$. Clearly this satisfies the reciprocity law, at least for $k(t)$.

- This is the tricky part: prove those $N_\nu$ do not actually depend on our selection of the embedding, or to prove this is the *only* correct norm.

To tell the truth, I don't like this proof, which seems to be in much chaos and is not so enlightening. It has long be known that we can interpret Milnor K-groups (even algebraic K, but too far-reaching) in the terms of intersection theory, and [MVW06] gives a construction showing $$ H^{n,n}(k,\mathbb{Z})=K_n^M(k) $$ where $H^{n,n}$ is the motivic cohomolgy. However, his proof is not so satisfying, since his construction of a pair of morphisms between motivic cohomology and Milnor K is depending on the existence of the norm map and Weil recprocity. So I decided to (try to) develop an alternative apporach that does not really requiring *any* preliminary knowledge about the Milnor K. Wish me good luck and forward!

# Singular homology
Following [SV96], fix a base field $k$ and all the schemes are considered being locally of finite type over $k$, which means that dimensions behave well. Define the $n$-simplex $\Delta_k^n$ as the hypersurface $\mathbb{A}_k^{n+1}/(T_0+\cdots+T_n-1)$. With the obvious face $\partial_i$ and degeneracy $s_i$ maps this turns out to be a cosimplicial object. For any $X\rightarrow Y$ over $k$, define $C_0(X/Y)$ to be the abelian group generated by cycles on $X$ which are finite and surjective over $Y$. Furthermore we let assign a simplicial object $C_\bullet(X/k)$ to $X/k$ namely $C_n(X/k)=C_0(X\times\Delta^n/\Delta^n)$. Finally we assign obvious complex $C_*(X/k)$ (with differentials as alternating face sums) to $X/k$ and our **singular homology** $H_i^{sing}(X/k)$, or $H_i(X/k)$ if there's no danger of confusion, is defined to be the homology of such complex. The base scheme $S$ in $C_\bullet(X/S)$ controls the dimension really well and for a cover $U\coprod V\rightarrow X$ we have Mayer-Vetoris 
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	0 & {C_\bullet(U\cap V)} & {C_\bullet(U)\oplus C_\bullet(V)} & {C_\bullet(X)} & 0
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["diag", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{(+,-)}", from=1-3, to=1-4]
	\arrow[from=1-4, to=1-5]
\end{tikzcd}
``` 
and
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots & {H_1(U\cap V)} & {H_1(U)\oplus H_1(V)} & {H_1(X)} & {} \\
	{} & {H_0(U\cap V)} & {H_0(U)\oplus H_0(V)} & {H_0(X)} \\
	{} & 0
	\arrow[from=2-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=2-4]
	\arrow[from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-4]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow["\delta", from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["\delta", from=2-1, to=2-2]
\end{tikzcd}
```


We now define $\mathbb{G}_m$ to be $\mathbb{A}_k^1\backslash\{0\}$, and $(\mathbb{G},*)$ be the virtual scheme which maps to the cokernel of 
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	0 & {C_*(k/k)} & {C_*(\mathbb{G}_m/k)} & 0
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["1", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=1-4]
\end{tikzcd}
```
We may say that $\mathbb{G}_m$ is *pointed* (in this case, by $1:*\rightarrow\mathbb{G}_m$) and $(\mathbb{G},*)$ is *punctured*. 

### Calculation of $H^{sing}_i(\mathbb{G}_m,*/k)$
From [SV96] we know that $H_i(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$ is $\mathbb{Z}\oplus k^*$ when $i=0$ and $0$ otherwise. We may just use this conclusion since the higher homology group is not so straightforward to calculate, but rather do some small observations on $H_0$. By definition $H_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$ is the cokernel of 
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	{C_0(\mathbb{G}_m\times\mathbb{A}^1/\mathbb{A}^1)} & {C_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)}
	\arrow["{\partial_0-\partial_1}", from=1-1, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}
```
$C_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$ is very easy since every integral subscheme of $\mathbb{G}_m$ of codimension $1$ is indeed represented by $f(t)=t^n+\cdots a_0\in k[t]$ where $a_0\not=0$. What about $C_1(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$? Thanks to the smoothness, a codim $1$ cycle $Z$ of $\mathbb{G}_m\times\mathbb{A}^1$ can be represented by some $g(t,x)=b_n(x)t^n+\cdots b_0(x)\in k[t,x]$ where $b_0(x)b_n(x)$ is not zero. The requirement that $Z$ being surjective over $\mathbb{A}^1$ is equivalent to say that those $b_i(x)$ cannot be trivial at the same time, and being *finite* requires V.Voedosky's small trick: we may view $\mathbb{G}_m\times\mathbb{A}^1$ as an open subscheme of $\mathbb{G}_m\times\mathbb{P}^1$, and $Z$ being finite is equivalent to being *closed* in those two schemes both, or to say $Z$ coincides with it's own projective closure. The only two suspecious points to check is $t=0$, which means $b_0(x)\in k^*$, and $t=\infty$, which means that $b_n(x)\in k^*$. We may further assume that $b_n(x)=1$, then $\partial_0-\partial_1$ gives $$
  D(t^n+\cdots+b_0)\sim D(t^n+b_0)
$$ This means that the *only* remaning information in $H_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$ coming from $C_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)$ is just degree and the coefficient of constant term, that is, $\mathbb{Z}\oplus k^*$. We'd rather take the second term to be $(-1)^na_0$ to match the intuition of the product of all positions of the roots.

What about the punctured one $H_0(G_m,*/k)$? We know that the point object $C_\bullet(k/k)$ is constant as $\mathbb{Z}$, and the point takes $n$ to $(x-1)^n$. By modding out this degree $1$ term in the exact sequence
$$ \cdots\rightarrow H_0(k/k)\rightarrow H_0(\mathbb{G}_m/k)\rightarrow H_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*/k)\rightarrow 0 $$ we see immediately that $H_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*/k)=k^*$. The same long exact sequence also suggests that higher homology groups of $(\mathbb{G}_m,*)$ vanishes, just as $\mathbb{G}_m$'s do.

# The ring construction

It's already clear that $H_0(\mathbb{G}_m,k)$ is our basic piece $k^*$, and now we're gonna construct the higher part of Milnor K. For a pair of schemes $X$ and $Y$ over $S$ and assuming all the smoothness we required, there's a homomorphism between abelian groups
$$ prod:C_0(X/S)\otimes_\mathbb{Z}C_0(Y/S)\rightarrow C_0(X\times Y/S) $$
namely sending a pair $(Z\hookrightarrow X,W\hookrightarrow Y)$ to $(X\times W)\cdot(Z\times Y)$ where $\cdot$ is the intersection product over $X\times Y$, which turns out to be supported on the zeroth $Tor$ part $(X\times W)\times(Z\times Y)$ which is finite and surjective over $S$, therefore well defined. *(Surjectiveness needs some further treamtment here, but mostly from cycle-theoretic intersection theory. I'll refine the related note later.)* As a result, a further morphism is induced, namely 
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	{(diag(C_\bullet(X/S)\otimes_\mathbb{Z}C_\bullet(Y/S)))_*} & {C_*(X/S)\otimes_\mathbb{Z}C_*(Y/S)} \\
	{(C_\bullet(X\times Y/S))_*}
	\arrow["{\phi}", from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{*(prod)}"', from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow["derived", dashed, from=1-2, to=2-1]
\end{tikzcd}
```
Eilenberg-Zilber theorem suggests that $\phi$ is a quasi-isomorphism (and even a chain homotopical equivalance) so we get a derived morphism, the dotted arrow in $D^-(Ab)$. Taking homology group we get a "cup product" $$ \cup:H_i(X/S)\otimes H_j(Y/S)\rightarrow H_{i+j}(X\times Y/S) $$
with cycles representing homology classes goes in the inverse direction against $\phi$
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	\cdots & {A_{22}} & {A_{11}} & {A_{00}} & 0 \\
	\cdots & {A_{20}\oplus A_{11}\oplus A_{02}} & {A_{10}\oplus A_{01}} & {A_{00}} & 0
	\arrow["{d_3d_3'}", from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow["{d_2d_2'}", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["{d_1d_1'}", from=1-3, to=1-4]
	\arrow[from=1-4, to=1-5]
	\arrow[from=2-4, to=2-5]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=2-4]
	\arrow[from=2-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow[from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=1-4, to=2-4]
\end{tikzcd}
```
It'll be quite complicated dealing with the higher homologies. However, a good news is we only need to deal with the zeroth part of the theory. Namely, the $n$-fold cup product at zero degree
$$ H_0(X_1/S)\otimes\cdots\otimes H_0(X_n/S)\rightarrow H_0(X_1\times\cdots\times X_n/S) $$
is determined by the related production of zero cycles. For two punctured (virtual) schemes $(S,*)/k$ and $(T,*)/k$, we see from our construction that there's a well defined **smash product** $C_*((S\wedge T,*)/k)$ quasi-isomorphic to $$ 0\rightarrow C_*(*)\rightarrow C_*(S)\oplus C_*(T)\rightarrow C_*(S\times T)\rightarrow 0. $$ The interesting part of this is the punctured point representing $0$ in the zeroth relative homology groups kills the cup product, namely $$ *\cup c'=c\cup *=0. $$ This suggests that we should consider the $n$-fold smash product of $(\mathbb{G}_m,*)/k$, and then there's the ring $M(k)$ defined to be $\oplus_{n\geq 0}H_0(\wedge^n(\mathbb{G}_m,*)/k)$. The production on $M(k)$ is straightforward as the cup product, and this is our candidate for Milnor K-theory of the field $k$. To prove this *is* Milnor K indeed, we need to see the following exact sequence $$ 0\rightarrow I\rightarrow\otimes H_0((\mathbb{G}_m,*)/k)\rightarrow M(k)\rightarrow 0 $$ where $I$ is the two-sided ideal generated by degree $2$ elements like $c\otimes c'$ where $c+c'=1$. 

### The first step: surjectiveness
We now prove that $\otimes^nH_0((\mathbb{G}_m,*)/k)\rightarrow H_0(\wedge^n(\mathbb{G}_m,*)/k)$ is a surjection. Fix a smooth scheme $X/k$, and denote the presheaf sending any smooth $Y/k$ to $C_0(X\times_k Y/Y)$ by $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$ (In fact, this is the same signature used in [MVW06]), then we know that $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$ is an abelian sheaf on $Sm/k$ with etale topology. This is proved in [MVW06] as a fundemental theorem for etale motives. Consider the sheaf $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(\bullet)$ restricted to $Et/k$, we have the product discussed above $$ prod:C_0(X/k)\otimes C_0(Y/k)\rightarrow C_0(X\times Y/k). $$ Passing to affine case, it's easily seen from the following diagram  
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	k & R & l \\
	{R'} & {R\otimes_kR'} & {l\otimes_kR'} \\
	M & {R\otimes_kM} & {M\otimes_kl}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=2-1]
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
	\arrow[from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow[from=2-1, to=3-1]
	\arrow[from=2-1, to=2-2]
	\arrow[from=1-2, to=2-2]
	\arrow[from=2-2, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=1-3, to=2-3]
	\arrow[from=2-2, to=3-2]
	\arrow[from=3-1, to=3-2]
	\arrow[from=3-2, to=3-3]
	\arrow[from=2-3, to=3-3]
\end{tikzcd}
```
that intersecting with a closed point is exact, hence the production of closed points with residue field $l$ and $l'$ respectively is a formal sum of closed points on $X\times Y$ with terms coincide with the closed points of $l\otimes_k l'$. This suggests that if our base scheme $k$ is algebraically closed, then $C_0(X/k)\otimes C_0(Y/k)$ should always equal to $C_0(X\times Y/k)$. Since $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(X)$ and $\mathbb{Z}_{tr}(Y)$ are sheaves on $Et/k$, we see that $$ C_0(X/k)\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}^{et} C_0(Y/k)\rightarrow C_0(X\times Y/k) $$ is an isomorphism, where $\otimes_{\mathbb{Z}}^{et}$ is the tensor product in the category of $Ab(Et/k)$. Now use this on the punctured $\mathbb{G}_m$, we have 
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	{\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)} & {(\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*))^+} & {C_0(\wedge^n(\mathbb{G}_m,*))}
	\arrow["\sim", from=1-2, to=1-3]
	\arrow["t", from=1-1, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}
```
where $\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)$ is the $n$-fold tensor product of complex of presheaves representing $C_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)$, and the second term is the sheafication(already being a seperated presheaf so just take the zeroth Cech cohomology), which is quasi-isomorphic to the third term by our comments above. Remember what we're gonna proof is that the morphism $$ \otimes^nk^*=\otimes^nH_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)\rightarrow H_0(\wedge^n(\mathbb{G}_m,*)) $$ is surjective, which is given by the sheafication
```rawlatex
\begin{tikzcd}
	{\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)(k)} & {(\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*))^+(k)}
	\arrow[from=1-1, to=1-2]
\end{tikzcd}
```
being surjective on global section. Namely, a global section of $(\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*))^+(k)$ is determined uniquely by a section $\wedge^nC_0(\mathbb{G}_m,*)(k')$ where $k'/k$ is galois. Now the remaning problem is to check that the $Gal(k'/k)$-module $\otimes^n(k')^*$ has a fixed subgroup $\otimes^nk^*$.

# (maybe) Miscellaneous: Eilenberg-Zilber theorem on bisimplicial objects

# References

[SV96] Suslin, Andrei, and Vladimir Voevodsky. “Singular Homology of Abstract Algebraic Varieties.” Inventiones Mathematicae 123, no. 1 (December 1996): 61–94. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF01232367.

[MVW06] Mazza, Carlo, Vladimir Alexandrovich Voevodsky, and Charles A. Weibel. Lecture Notes on Motivic Cohomology. Clay Mathematics Monographs, volume 2. Providence (R.I.): American mathematical society, 2006.

[BT73]  H. Bass and J. Tate, The Milnor ring of a global field, Algebraic K-theory II (Battelle Memorial
 Inst., Seattle, Washington, 1972), Lecture Notes in Math., vol. 342, Springer-Verlag, New York,
 1973



